
Referee's report 
"Parton distributions and lattice QCD calculations: a community white paper"
Huey-Wen Lin et al.

----------------------------------------------

This paper is a very useful offspring of the Workshop on Parton Distributions 
and Lattice Calculations in the LHC Era (PDFLattice2017), which took part in March 2017.
A very systematic collection of results from both the global phenomenological fits and the 
lattice calculations concerning the PDFs of the proton is most useful and the paper 
should definitely be published.  

Below are my remarks, aiming at improving the text, which should be adressed before 
the paper is published. 

----------------------------------------------

1. On page 10 and further on the authors refer to the lowest three moments. 
I understand they count from 0: 0, 1, 2. This should be stated explicitly to avoid
confusion of unxperienced readers.

2. Figure 2.1, as well as the results for the benchmarks from Sect. 3, show that the present 
Euclidean lattice results are, although encouraging, preliminary at best. Looking at Fig. 2.1 
it is not clear if the normalization (0th moment) is correct. Could the autors check and state 
this explicitly? 

3. At the bottom of page 17 it is stated that factorization is observed, but the simulations 
used by Orginos et al. are quenched and this should be stated. The authors should also precicely 
say what factorization they have in mind (call it the transverse-longitudinal factorization, or the 
transverse-virtuality z^2 factorization). Also, TMDs are mentioned here in passing, whereas they
are related in a very deep and simple way, as shown by Radyuskkin, to the quasi/pseudo distributions. 
It is worth to show this relation as one of the cornerstones of the approach. 
Also, the authors should state that the studies of TMDs on the lattice (cf. the included 
Ref. to Musch et al.) use a very similar methodology to Orginos et al., in particular, the Ioffe 
distributions are used, and the ratio (2.33) is fully analogous to the quantity used by Musch et al.

In that context, it should be pointed out that the results of the quasi/pseudo technique at a FIXED
P_3 are also physically interensing, not only the P_3 -> infinity limit. The issue is discussed in 
a recent arXiv:1711.03377.

I understand that requesting the authors to present detailed results on the TMDs would be excessive, 
but the issue should be properly mentioned, with references, and key messages. 

4. There is no clear discussion of the fiducial region for the quasi/pseudo method, which is 
large x. An obvious estimate was presented, e.g., arXiv:1711.03377, where x>1/n, 
with 2 pi n = P_3 L. Hence, presenty, x > 0.1 or so - very large. The authors should include 
a discussion here and state at what values of x the forseeable result could be trusted. 

5. The proposed benchmarks are very simplistic and do not take into account the fiducial x region. 
It would be better in the future to use benchmarks truncated from below, as discussed for the gluons.
The paragraph in the Outlook section starting with "First, we have restricted our benchmark..." should
contain a more detailed discussion and proposal on benchmarks good at large x. 

The present status of the agreement of the first moments on the lattice to phenomenology 
shows how long is the way to go and it should be admitted. 

Also, the presentation of the benchmarks based on <x> creates an impression that the new techniques 
based on quasi/pseudo distributions aim at computing x moments, whereas the ultimate and 
ambitious goal is to compute the PDFs directly in x space. Perghaps a better benchmark would be simply t
o compare the valus at specific values of x> x-0.5, 0.75, ... ?

6. The authors should show for completeness the results for the second x moments from the lattice.

7. Editorial comment: it would be nice to have the results shown in Tables 3.1-3.3 and the corresponding 
results for the global fits in Table 3.4 etc. to place, correspondingly do the displayed quantity,
next to each. That would facilitate the comparison for the reader without the necessity to flip pages.

8. Top left Fig. 4.3 - please, shift legend such that it does not cover the curves.

9. Being a white paper, the work also serves as a review of the field. As such, it might contain some 
representative references to: pion PDFs, TMDs, and QCD-based nonperturbative models of the PDFs 
(perhaps as yet another method listed in the introduction). That would broaden the outreach of the 
paper. The authors might also mention the transverse (hamiltonian) lattice studies of 
M. Burkardt and S. Dalley, aiming at the same goal of obtaing PDF's directly in x space.




